Move in place three sections to docs "How-to" (in Managing your installation) (#4074)
aiidateam/aiida-core: docs/source/howto/installation.rst

Tuning performance
==================

AiiDA supports running hundreds of thousands of calculations and graphs with millions of nodes.
However, to scale to this amount, you might need to properly configure some variables in AiiDA to balance the load on your CPU and disk.

Here are a few things you can do in order to keep AiiDA running smoothly:

  1. :ref:`Move the Postgresql database<how-to:installation:more:move_postgresql>` to a fast disk (SSD), ideally on a large partition.

  2. Use AiiDA's tools for making :ref:`efficient incremental backups<how-to:installation:backup:repository>` of the file repository.

  3. Your operating system may be indexing the file repository.
     :ref:`Disable this<how-to:installation:more:disable_repo_indexing>`.

  4. The verdi deamon can manage an arbitrary number of parallel workers; by default only one is activated. If ``verdi daemon status`` shows the daemon worker(s) constantly at high CPU usage, use ``verdi daemon incr X`` to add ``X`` daemon workers.

>      However, don't use many more workers than CPU cores on your machine (or ideally, if you have many cores, leave one or two available for the database).

Author: I adapted your suggestion to still mention to use 1/2 cores less (in @sphuber results, this was important)

>   5. If you submit to a supercomputer shared by many users (e.g., in a supercomputer center), be careful not to overload the supercomputer with too many jobs:

Author: Ok, I'll create a section "Running on supercomputers"

       For a given computer, you can increase how many seconds must pass between requests.
       First load the computer in a shell with ``computer = load_computer(<COMPUTER_NAME>)``.
       You can check the current value in seconds (by default, 10) with ``computer.get_minimum_job_poll_interval()``.
       You can then set it to a higher value using::

         computer.set_minimum_job_poll_interval(<NEW_VALUE_SECONDS>)

.. _how-to:installation:update:

Updating your installation
==========================

1. Enter the python environment where AiiDA is installed
2. Finish all running calculations.
   After migrating your database, you will not be able to resume unfinished calculations.
   Data of finished calculations will of course be automatically migrated.
3. Stop the daemon using ``verdi daemon stop``.
4. :ref:`Create a backup of your database and repository<how-to:installation:backup>`.

   .. warning::

      Once you have migrated your database, you can no longer go back to an older version of ``aiida-core`` (unless you restore your database and repository from a backup).

5. Update your ``aiida-core`` installation.

>     * If you have installed AiiDA through ``pip`` simply run: ``pip install --upgrade aiida-core``.

Author: Ok. Do you know what is the correct conda command to use?

>     * If you have installed AiiDA through ``pip`` simply run: ``pip install --upgrade aiida-core``.

Author: Ok, I'll take care of this.

>     * If you have installed from the git repository using ``pip install -e .``, first delete all the ``.pyc`` files (``find . -name "*.pyc" -delete``) before updating your branch.

Author: This has caused a lot of pain in the past (@sphuber can confirm), so I would vote for keeping this (unless we are sure that in python 3 the problem is solved, but I'm not sure it is). If you feel we should mention `__pycache__`, it's ok with me (should we just delete those as well?). But I think that if we delete the *.pyc, in py3 these are inside the `__pycache__` folder and the suggestion would still work.

In detail, the reason for the problems that you get if you don't delete them is when you delete or rename a file. In particular, this happened a lot in the 0.x->1.x transition (might be less relevant in the 1.x versions, but we might still end up doing some refactoring of internal python files). However, since *.pyc are not tracked by git, git would leave them at their old location together with their folders, and python would happily continue to load them.

    * The "destination folder", where the files of the backup will be stored.
      This defaults to a subfolder of the backup folder but we **strongly suggest to back up to a different drive** (see note below).

    The configuration step creates two files in the "backup folder": a ``backup_info.json`` configuration file (can also be edited manually) and a ``start_backup.py`` script.

    .. note::

        Using the same disk for your backup forgoes protection against the most common cause of data loss: disk failure.
        One simple option is to use a destination folder mounted over ssh.

        On Ubuntu, install ``sshfs`` using ``sudo apt-get install sshfs``.
        Imagine you run your calculations on `server_1` and would like to back up regularly to `server_2`.
        Mount a `server_2` directory on `server_1` using the following command on `server_1`:

        .. code-block:: shell

            sshfs -o idmap=user -o rw backup_user@server_2:/home/backup_user/backup_destination_dir/ /home/aiida_user/remote_backup_dir/

        Use ``gnome-session-properties`` in the terminal to add this line to the actions performed at start-up.

>         Do **not** add it to your shell's startup file (e.g. ``.bashrc``) or your computer will complain that the mount point is not empty whenever you open a new terminal.

Author: Ok, I'll use the panels (they will appear once #4107 is merged as well, the only needed change from there is to pip-install version 0.4.0 of sphinx_panels instead of 0.1.0)

 2. Run the ``start_backup.py`` script in the "backup folder" to start the backup.

    This will back up all data added after the ``oldest_object_backedup`` date.
    It will only carry out a new backup every ``periodicity`` days, until a certain end date if specified (using ``end_date_of_backup`` or ``days_to_backup``), see :ref:`how-to:installation:backup:repository:configuration_options` below.

    Once you've checked that it works, make sure to run the script periodically (e.g. using a daily cron job, see note below).

    .. note::

        On Ubuntu, you can set up a cron job using::

            sudo crontab -u USERNAME -e

        It will open an editor, where you can add a line of the form::

            00 03 * * * /home/USERNAME/.aiida/backup/start_backup.py 2>&1 | mail -s "Incremental backup of the repository" USER_EMAIL@domain.net

        or (if you need to backup a different profile than the default one)::

            00 03 * * * verdi -p PROFILENAME run /home/USERNAME/.aiida/backup/start_backup.py 2>&1 | mail -s "Incremental backup of the repository" USER_EMAIL@domain.net

>         This will launch the backup of the database every day at 3 AM (03:00), and send the output (or any error message) to the email address specified at the end (provided the ``mail`` command -- from ``mailutils`` -- is configured appropriately).

Author: Ok

Finally, if you have a separate automatic backup of your home directory set up, do not forget to exclude the repository folder.

.. _how-to:installation:backup:repository:configuration_options:

Configuration options

> ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Author: Ok, will do.

* | ``days_to_backup`` (in `days` or ``null``):
  | If set, you specify how many days you will backup from the starting date of your backup.
    If it is set to ``null`` and also ``end_date_of_backup`` is set to ``null``, then the end date of the backup is set to the current date.
    You can not set ``days_to_backup`` & ``end_date_of_backup`` at the same time (it will lead to an error).
  | E.g. ``"days_to_backup": null`` or ``"days_to_backup": 5``.

* | ``backup_length_threshold`` (in `hours`):
  | The backup script runs in rounds and on every round it will backup a number of days that are controlled primarily by ``periodicity`` and also by ``end_date_of_backup`` / ``days_to_backup``, for the last backup round.
    The ``backup_length_threshold`` specifies the *lowest acceptable* round length.
    This is important for the end of the backup.
  | E.g. ``backup_length_threshold: 1``

* | ``backup_dir`` (absolute path):
  | The destination directory of the backup.
  | E.g. ``"backup_dir": "/home/USERNAME/.aiida/backup/backup_dest"``.

.. _how-to:installation:backup:postgresql:

Database backup

> ---------------

Author: I simplified the section and linked to PSQL docs

After the database migration finishes, you will be able to continue working with your existing data.

.. note::
    If the update involved a change in the major version number of ``aiida-core``, expect :ref:`backwards incompatible changes<updating_backward_incompatible_changes>` and check whether you also need to update installed plugin packages.

Updating from 0.x.* to 1.*
--------------------------
- <Additional instructions on how to migrate from 0.12.x versions `https://aiida.readthedocs.io/projects/aiida-core/en/v1.2.1/install/updating_installation.html#updating-from-0-12-to-1`>.
- <Additional instructions on how to migrate from versions 0.4 -- 0.11 `https://aiida.readthedocs.io/projects/aiida-core/en/v1.2.1/install/updating_installation.html#older-versions`>.
- For a list of breaking changes between the 0.x and the 1.x series of AiiDA, check <this page `https://aiida.readthedocs.io/projects/aiida-core/en/v1.2.1/install/updating_installation.html#breaking-changes-from-0-12-to-1`>.

.. _how-to:installation:backup:

Backing up your installation
============================

A full backup of an AiiDA instance and AiiDA managed data requires a backup of:

>  * the profile configuration in the ``config.json`` file located in the ``.aiida`` folder.

Reviewer: Check whether the bullet points are now showing (before they were somehow missing)

Author: It's ok now

   Typically located at ``~/.aiida`` (see also :ref:`configure_aiida`).

 * files associated with nodes in the repository folder (one per profile). Typically located in the ``.aiida`` folder.

 * queryable metadata in the PostgreSQL database (one per profile).

.. _how-to:installation:backup:repository:

Repository backup (``.aiida`` folder)
-------------------------------------

> For **small repositories** back up the ``.aiida`` folder either by making a full copy or using tools for incremental backups like ``rsync``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For **small repositories** with less than 100k nodes, simply back up the ``.aiida`` folder using standard backup software.
For example, the ``rsync`` utility supports incremental backups, and a backup command might look like ``rsync ...``
```

Reviewer: It would be quite useful for people to already have the sensible flags here.

Tuning performance
==================

AiiDA supports running hundreds of thousands of calculations and graphs with millions of nodes.
However, optimal performance at that scale might require some tweaks to the AiiDA configuration to balance the CPU and disk load.

Here are a few general tips that might improve the AiiDA performance:

  1. :ref:`Move the Postgresql database<how-to:installation:more:move_postgresql>` to a fast disk (SSD), ideally on a large partition.

  2. Use AiiDA's tools for making :ref:`efficient incremental backups<how-to:installation:backup:repository>` of the file repository.

  3. Prevent your operating system from indexing the file repository.

     .. dropdown:: Disabling ``locate`` on Linux

        Many Linux distributions include the ``locate`` command to quickly find files and folders, and run a daily cron job ``updatedb.mlocate`` to create the corresponding index.
        A large file repository can take a long time to index, up to the point where the hard drive is constantly indexing.

>         In order to exclude the repository folder from indexing, add its path to the ``PRUNEPATH`` variable in the ``/etc/updatedb.conf`` configuration file (use ``sudo``).

Author: This works for me - make sure to have `sphinx-panels~=0.4.0`. I have now rebased so the dependency is in.

> Tuning performance

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
.. _how-to:installation:tuning:

Tuning performance
```

Reviewer 2: oops sorry, didn't notice this was above

    * If you have installed from the git repository using ``pip install -e .``, first delete all the ``.pyc`` files (``find . -name "*.pyc" -delete``) before updating your branch with ``git pull``.

6. Migrate your database with ``verdi -p <profile_name> database migrate``.
   Depending on the size of your database and the number of migrations to perform, data migration can take time, so please be patient.

After the database migration finishes, you will be able to continue working with your existing data.

.. note::
    If the update involved a change in the major version number of ``aiida-core``, expect :ref:`backwards incompatible changes<updating_backward_incompatible_changes>` and check whether you also need to update installed plugin packages.

Updating from 0.x.* to 1.*
--------------------------
- `Additional instructions on how to migrate from 0.12.x versions <https://aiida.readthedocs.io/projects/aiida-core/en/v1.2.1/install/updating_installation.html#updating-from-0-12-to-1>`_.
- `Additional instructions on how to migrate from versions 0.4 -- 0.11 <https://aiida.readthedocs.io/projects/aiida-core/en/v1.2.1/install/updating_installation.html#older-versions>`_.

> - For a list of breaking changes between the 0.x and the 1.x series of AiiDA, check `this page <https://aiida.readthedocs.io/projects/aiida-core/en/v1.2.1/install/updating_installation.html#breaking-changes-from-0-12-to-1>`_.

Reviewer 2: The other approach to this is to keep move these sections to e.g.  `docs/source/howto/_version_migrations.rst` and link to that.
Then at the top of that document put `:orphan:`; this tells sphinx that the document is not required to show up in any ToC. This is what I have currently done in #4060 (see https://7-77234579-gh.circle-artifacts.com/0/html/intro/installation.html#updating-aiida-core), but I will remove that section and link here

  3. Prevent your operating system from indexing the file repository.

     .. dropdown:: Disabling ``locate`` on Linux

        Many Linux distributions include the ``locate`` command to quickly find files and folders, and run a daily cron job ``updatedb.mlocate`` to create the corresponding index.
        A large file repository can take a long time to index, up to the point where the hard drive is constantly indexing.

        In order to exclude the repository folder from indexing, add its path to the ``PRUNEPATH`` variable in the ``/etc/updatedb.conf`` configuration file (use ``sudo``).

  4. The verdi deamon can manage an arbitrary number of parallel workers; by default only one is activated. If ``verdi daemon status`` shows the daemon worker(s) constantly at high CPU usage, use ``verdi daemon incr X`` to add ``X`` daemon workers.
     It is recommended that the number of workers does not exceed the number of CPU cores (or, if possible, that you use one or two cores less than your machine has, to avoid to degrade the PostgreSQL database performance).

.. _how-to:installation:running-on-supercomputers:

> Running on supercomputers

Reviewer 3: I'd recommend that we move this section a bit further down to after "Backing up your installation" given that this section is probably slightly less relevant for the average user in comparison to the other sections.

Author: Ok, will move

       A global agent is available, for instance, on recent versions of Mac OS X and of Ubuntu Linux.

    Then edit the file ``~/.bashrc`` and add the following lines:

    .. code:: bash

        if [ -f ~/bin/load-singlesshagent.sh ]; then
            . ~/bin/load-singlesshagent.sh
        fi

    To check that it works, perform the following steps:

    * Open a new shell, so that the ``~/.bashrc`` file is sourced.
    * Run the command ``ssh-add`` as described in the following section.
    * Logout from the current shell.
    * Open a new shell.
    * Check that you are able to connect to the remote computer without typing the passphrase.

Adding the passphrase of your key(s) to the agent
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

To provide the passphrase of your private key to the the agent use the command:

.. code:: bash

    ssh-add

If you changed the default position or the default name of the private key, or you want to provide the passphrase only for a specific key, you need specify the path to the SSH key file as a parameter to ``ssh-add``.

The private key and the relative passphrase are now recorded in an instance of the agent.

.. note::

>    The passphase is stored in the agent only until the next reboot. If you shut down or restart the AiiDA machine, before starting the AiiDA deamon remember to run the ``ssh-add`` command again.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   The passphase is stored in the agent only until the next reboot.
   If you shut down or restart the AiiDA machine, before starting the AiiDA deamon remember to run the ``ssh-add`` command again.
```

Configure AiiDA
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

In order to use the agent in AiiDA, you need to first make sure that you can connect to the computer via SSH without explicitly specifying a passphrase.
Make sure that this is the case also in newly opened bash shells.

Then, when configuring the corresponding AiiDA computer (via ``verdi computer configure``), make sure to specify ``true`` to the question ``Allow ssh agent``.

> If you already configured the computer and just want to adapt the computer configuration, you can run again

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If you already configured the computer and just want to adapt the computer configuration, just rerun
```

.. code:: bash

    verdi computer configure ssh COMPUTERNAME

> After the configuration, you should verify that AiiDA can connect to the computer successfully using:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
After the configuration, you should verify that AiiDA can connect to the computer with:
```

.. code:: bash

    verdi computer test COMPUTERNAME

.. _how-to:installation:running-on-supercomputers:avoiding-overloads:

Avoiding overloads
------------------

If you submit to a supercomputer shared by many users (e.g., in a supercomputer center), be careful not to overload the supercomputer with too many jobs:

>   * keep the number of jobs in the queue under control (the exact number depends on the supercomputer: discuss this with your supercomputer administrators, and you can redirect them to :ref:`this page<how-to:installation:running-on-supercomputers:for_cluster_admins>` that may contain useful information for them).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  * limit the number of jobs in the queue (the exact number depends on the supercomputer: discuss this with your supercomputer administrators, and you can redirect them to :ref:`this page<how-to:installation:running-on-supercomputers:for_cluster_admins>` that may contain useful information for them).
```

>     While in the future `this might be dealt by AiiDA automatically <https://github.com/aiidateam/aiida-core/issues/88>`_,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    While in the future `this might be dealt with by AiiDA automatically <https://github.com/aiidateam/aiida-core/issues/88>`_,
```

    We stress that this is *per daemon worker*, so that if you have 10 workers, your supercomputer will on average see 10 connections every 30 seconds.
    Therefore, if you are using many workers and you mostly have long-running jobs, you can set a longer time (e.g., 120 seconds) by reconfiguring the computer with ``verdi computer configure ssh <COMPUTER_NAME>`` and changing the value
    of the *Connection cooldown time* or, alternatively, by running::

      verdi computer configure ssh --non-interactive --safe-interval <SECONDS> <COMPUTER_NAME>

  * In addition to the connection cooldown time described above, AiiDA also avoids running too often the command to get the list of jobs in the queue (``squeue``, ``qstat``, ...), as this can also impact the performance of the scheduler.
    For a given computer, you can increase how many seconds must pass between requests.
    First load the computer in a shell with ``computer = load_computer(<COMPUTER_NAME>)``.
    You can check the current value in seconds (by default, 10) with ``computer.get_minimum_job_poll_interval()``.
    You can then set it to a higher value using::

>       computer.set_minimum_job_poll_interval(<NEW_VALUE_SECONDS>)

Reviewer 3: We have decided in a separate discussion to always use explicit mark-up for code segments, see [here](https://github.com/aiidateam/aiida-core/wiki/Writing-documentation#code-segments).

Author: Ok, sorry, I had missed that - I'll fix this

.. _how-to:installation:running-on-supercomputers:for_cluster_admins:

Optimising the SLURM scheduler configuration

> --------------------------------------------

Reviewer 3: I'm wondering if we should move this content to the wiki instead and link there. It's informative in this context, but it does not really document the "AiiDA" software itself.

I am also a bit worried that presenting this information prominently in the documentation might cause an issue, because it is very assuming. I am thinking about admins of large supercomputer centers that have spent thousands of hours fine-tuning their scheduler systems, who might get a little weirded out (or worse: offended) by getting general recommendations on how to set up their system from AiiDA users. Our close relationship with CSCS is certainly not the norm for the average user.

Author: Ok, I see your point, so I moved to the wiki (but I would still link from here, as otherwise the information will be very hard to find).

Anyway, I'm not particularly worried of people getting offended in this case - we are not giving them recommendations, but just making public some hints provided to us by CSCS, that is one of the biggest HPC centres worldwide. Actually, if other centres have more suggestions, I'd be happy to extend that page.

Reviewer 3: Maybe "offended" wasn't the right word, but either way, the wiki is probably a better place for this.

> If too many jobs are submitted at the same time to the queue, SLURM might have troubles in dealing with the new submissions.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If too many jobs are submitted at the same time to the queue, SLURM might have troubles in dealing with new submissions.
```

For **large repositories** with millions of files, even incremental backups can take a significant amount of time.
AiiDA provides a helper script that takes advantage of the AiiDA database in order to figure out which files have been added since your last backup.
The instructions below explain how to use it:

 1. Configure your backup using ``verdi -p PROFILENAME devel configure-backup`` where ``PROFILENAME`` is the name of the AiiDA profile that should be backed up.
    This will ask for information on:

    * The "backup folder", where the backup *configuration file* will be placed.
      This defaults to a folder named ``backup_PROFILENAME`` in your ``.aiida`` directory.

    * The "destination folder", where the files of the backup will be stored.
      This defaults to a subfolder of the backup folder but we **strongly suggest to back up to a different drive** (see note below).

    The configuration step creates two files in the "backup folder": a ``backup_info.json`` configuration file (can also be edited manually) and a ``start_backup.py`` script.

>     .. dropdown:: Notes on using a SSH mount for the backups (on Linux)

Reviewer 3: Again, at least on my local computer, this doesn't work.

Author: See above
